clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/suspicious-include.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-suspicious-include

bugprone-suspicious-include
===========================

The check detects various cases when an include refers to what appears to be an
implementation file, which often leads to hard-to-track-down ODR violations.

Examples:

.. code-block:: c++

  #include "Dinosaur.hpp"     // OK, .hpp files tend not to have definitions.
  #include "Pterodactyl.h"    // OK, .h files tend not to have definitions.
  #include "Velociraptor.cpp" // Warning, filename is suspicious.
  #include_next <stdio.c>     // Warning, filename is suspicious.

Options
-------
.. option:: HeaderFileExtensions

   Default value: ``";h;hh;hpp;hxx"``
   A semicolon-separated list of filename extensions of header files (the
   filename extensions should not contain a "." prefix). For extension-less
   header files, use an empty string or leave an empty string between ";"
   if there are other filename extensions.

.. option:: ImplementationFileExtensions

   Default value: ``"c;cc;cpp;cxx"``
   Likewise, a semicolon-separated list of filename extensions of
   implementation files.

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] Introduce HeaderFileExtensions and ImplementationFileExtensions options
We have a number of checks designed to analyze problems
in header files only, for example:

bugprone-suspicious-include
google-build-namespaces
llvm-header-guard
misc-definitions-in-header
...

All these checks duplicate the same logic and options
to determine whether a location is placed in the main
source file or in the header. More checks are coming
up with similar requirements.

Thus, to remove duplication, let's move this option
to the top-level configuration of clang-tidy (since
it's something all checks should share).

Since the checks fetch the option via getLocalOrGlobal,
the behavior is unchanged.

Add a deprecation notice for all checks that use the
local option, prompting to update to the global option.

The functionality for parsing the option will need to
remain in the checks during the transition period.
Once the local options are fully removed, the goal
is to store the parsed options in the ClangTidyContext,
that checks can easily have access to.

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D141000

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/suspicious-include.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-suspicious-include

bugprone-suspicious-include
===========================

The check detects various cases when an include refers to what appears to be an
implementation file, which often leads to hard-to-track-down ODR violations.

Examples:

.. code-block:: c++

  #include "Dinosaur.hpp"     // OK, .hpp files tend not to have definitions.
  #include "Pterodactyl.h"    // OK, .h files tend not to have definitions.
  #include "Velociraptor.cpp" // Warning, filename is suspicious.
  #include_next <stdio.c>     // Warning, filename is suspicious.

Options
-------
.. option:: HeaderFileExtensions

   Note: this option is deprecated, it will be removed in :program:`clang-tidy`
   version 18. Please use the global configuration option
   `HeaderFileExtensions`.

   Default value: ``";h;hh;hpp;hxx"``
   A semicolon-separated list of filename extensions of header files (the
   filename extensions should not contain a "." prefix). For extension-less
   header files, use an empty string or leave an empty string between ";"
   if there are other filename extensions.

.. option:: ImplementationFileExtensions

   Note: this option is deprecated, it will be removed in :program:`clang-tidy`.
   version 18. Please use the global configuration option
   `ImplementationFileExtensions`.

   Default value: ``"c;cc;cpp;cxx"``
   Likewise, a semicolon-separated list of filename extensions of
   implementation files.
